Proposal about introducing changes to component's code and it's chart… (#263)
kyma-project/community: sig-and-wg/sig-core/proposals/update-code-and-chart-in-one-pr.md

  dir: pr/
  version: PR-1234
```

With this approach, Prow executes component and integration jobs for the same PR. We have to ensure the proper order of jobs
to build components before using them in integration jobs. To achieve that, an additional step is required at the beginning of 
every integration job that waits for all dependent jobs. See [this](#guard-integration-jobs) section for more details.

In the beginning, the described approach can be optional, which means that a developer can decide whether he updates code and chart in the same PR or not. 
As a next step, we can introduce a job that checks if a version of the chart is updated in the PR. See
[this](#job-enforcing-changes-in-one-pr) section for more information.

In case there are two PRs that change the same component, there will be a merge conflict for the second PR because
it will modify the same line in the `values.yaml` file. Such approach ensures that the `master` branch contains changes from both PRs.

### Developers workflow
A developer is working on an issue that requires changes in the `helm-broker` component.
- Create a branch.
- Introduce changes to the `helm-broker`. Write or update unit tests.

> - In order to test introduced changes in Kyma, create a Pull Request. Pull request has number `1234`. Because only `helm-broker` code was modified, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Create a pull request to test the introduced changes (let's assume that the pull request has number `1234`). As only the `helm-broker` code was modified, 
```

> the `pre-master-kyma-component-helm-broker` job is executed. All other jobs are skipped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `pre-master-kyma-component-helm-broker` job is executed. All the other jobs are skipped.
```

> If the job is successful, the component's image is published: `eu.grc.io/kyma-project/pr/helm-broker:PR-1234`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the job is successful, the component's image is published under `eu.grc.io/kyma-project/pr/helm-broker:PR-1234`.
```

> - A developer tests changes locally on a minikube. In order to use the newly created image, he edits `kyma-project/kyma/resources/helm-broker/values.yaml` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Test your changes locally on Minikube. In order to use the newly created image, edit [this](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/blob/master/resources/helm-broker/values.yaml) `values.yaml` file:
```

```
global:

  helm_broker:
    dir: pr/
    version: PR-1234
```

> If everything is fine, commit changes made to `values.yaml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If everything is fine, commit the changes you have made to the `values.yaml` file.
```

> - The following Prowjobs are triggered:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. The following Prowjobs are triggered:
```

    - `pre-master-kyma-component-helm-broker` - even though component was not changed in this commit, Prow triggers all jobs
according to the changes introduced in the PR.

>     - all integration jobs: `pre-master-kyma-integration`, `pre-master-kyma-gke-integration`, `pre-master-kyma-gke-upgrade` etc. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - All pre-master integration jobs, such as `pre-master-kyma-integration`, `pre-master-kyma-gke-integration`, `pre-master-kyma-gke-upgrade`, etc. 
```

> All those jobs are triggered because the file in `resources` directory was modified. All integration jobs have a Guard step that waits

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All these jobs are triggered because the file in the `resources` directory was modified. All integration jobs have a Guard step that waits
```

until `pre-master-kyma-component-helm-broker` is completed.

> - If all jobs are successful, a developer can merge changes to the `master` branch. The following jobs are triggered:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. If all jobs are successful, you can merge changes to the `master` branch. The following jobs are triggered:
```

>     - `post-master-kyma-component-helm-broker`. This job creates the image `eu.grc.io/kyma-project/develop/helm-broker:{commit-id}`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `post-master-kyma-component-helm-broker` which creates the `eu.grc.io/kyma-project/develop/helm-broker:{commit-id}` image. 
```

This image is not used.

>     - all integration jobs: `post-master-kyma-integration`, `post-master-kyma-gke-integration`, `post-master-kyma-gke-upgrade` etc. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - All post-master integration jobs, such as `post-master-kyma-integration`, `post-master-kyma-gke-integration`, `post-master-kyma-gke-upgrade`, etc. 
```

> These jobs do not have to wait for any other jobs, because images that they use, already exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These jobs do not have to wait for any other jobs because images that they use already exist.
```

every integration job that waits for all dependent jobs. See [this](#guard-integration-jobs) section for more details.

In the beginning, the described approach can be optional, which means that a developer can decide whether he updates code and chart in the same PR or not. 
As a next step, we can introduce a job that checks if a version of the chart is updated in the PR. See
[this](#job-enforcing-changes-in-one-pr) section for more information.

In case there are two PRs that change the same component, there will be a merge conflict for the second PR because
it will modify the same line in the `values.yaml` file. Such approach ensures that the `master` branch contains changes from both PRs.

### Guard integration jobs
To postpone the execution of integration jobs, we should add an additional step at the beginning of every integration job.
To decide whether the integration job can be executed, use the checks of a given pull request:
![](./assets/job-status-checks.png)

Most of these checks are sent by Prow and represent statuses of jobs execution.

The Guard workflow looks as follows:
1. Fetch all required checks sent by Prow for a given PR that represent components build. 

> Guard filters checks by its names. In Kyma Prow configuration, there is a convention for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Guard filters checks by their names. In Kyma Prow configuration, there is a convention for
```

job names. For example, every component job name for master branch starts with `pre-master-kyma-components-`.
2. If any status is marked as failed, the integration job fails to reduce the number of provisioned clusters and VMs.
3. If all checks are successful, the integration job execution is continued.
4. If waiting for checks takes more than the defined timeout (10min), the integration job fails.
Notice that Prow defines a maximum number of concurrently executed jobs. 
There could be an extremely rare situation, that Prow executes only integration jobs that all wait for components jobs that cannot be executed because a maximum
number of concurrent jobs was reached. In such a case, a developer has to trigger an integration job manually. 

> 5. If some statuses are in Pending state, wait some time (15s) and go to point 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. If some statuses are in the Pending state, wait some time (15s) and go to point 1.
```

- Bump image version in the chart

Such an approach has many drawbacks:

- Slow development cycle, dealing with 2 PRs, asking for approvals twice
- A developer can forget to bump image and version can be updated only on the release day. Updating version on the release day is 
the worst case scenario because we postponed integration of our components. This is against Continuous Integration approach.
- The code in the repository does not reflect what is really running.
- Ugly repository history. Many commits only bump the component's image version.

## Goal
- Kyma developer can introduce his changes to Kyma in one Pull Request. Changes to the component and helm chart where we update component version is done in the same PR.
- The code in the Kyma repository reflects code executed on the Kyma.
When doing a release we rebuild all components. We should not be surprised on the release day that some tests are failing because some component was not updated for 3 weeks
- Kyma repository has a nice commit history and commits that only bumps a component version are rare.
- Run Kyma integration tests with the modified component within the same pull request status checks

> ## Proposed solution

Reviewer 2: Describe how the idea will work if there are to branches (and PRs) created for the same component at the same time.

Author: Added:
> In situation, that there are two PRs changing the same component, there will be a merge conflict for the second PR because
the same line in `values.yaml` was modified. Thanks to that, we ensure that `master` branch contains changes from both PRs.

# Update component and its chart in one pull request

Created on 2019-23-04 by Adam Szecowka (@aszecowka) and Pawel Kosiec (@pkosiec). 

## Status
Proposed on 2019-23-04.

## Motivation
Currently, when a developer introduces changes to his component, he needs to do at least 2 PR:

- Changes made to the component
- Bump image version in the chart

Such an approach has many drawbacks:

- Slow development cycle, dealing with 2 PRs, asking for approvals twice
- A developer can forget to bump image and version can be updated only on the release day. Updating version on the release day is 
the worst case scenario because we postponed integration of our components. This is against Continuous Integration approach.
- The code in the repository does not reflect what is really running.
- Ugly repository history. Many commits only bump the component's image version.

## Goal
- Kyma developer can introduce his changes to Kyma in one Pull Request. Changes to the component and helm chart where we update component version is done in the same PR.

> - The code in the Kyma repository reflects code executed on the Kyma.

Author: on the main page of `https://kyma-project.io/` Kyma word is capitalized every time. Where can I find guidelines on how to write the most important word in this project?

> When doing a release we rebuild all components. We should not be surprised on the release day that some tests are failing because some component was not updated for 3 weeks

Author: this changes the meaning of the sentence: In my sentence, it can happen (let assume 20% chances), in your sentence, it is going to happen (100% chances).

- Kyma repository has a nice commit history and commits that only bumps a component version are rare.
- Run Kyma integration tests with the modified component within the same pull request status checks

## Proposed solution

**Allow using images built on Pull Requests on master branch**

Let assume that I am working on PR-1234. When I modify `componentA`, Presubmit jobs build Docker images. 
A tag of such image is the same as a pull request number.
A developer can use this version in a `values.yaml` file:
```
component_a:
  dir: pr/
  version: PR-1234
```

With this approach, Prow executes component's and integration's jobs for the same PR. We have to ensure the proper order of jobs,
to build components before using them in integration jobs. To achieve that, an additional step is required at the beginning of 
every integration jobs that waits for all dependent jobs.

> To read more details, see [Guard integration jobs](#guard-integration-jobs).

Author: done

As a next step, we can introduce a job that checks if a version of the chart is updated in the PR. To read more details, 
see [Job enforcing changes in one PR](#job-enforcing-changes-in-one-pr).

In situation, that there are two PRs changing the same component, there will be a merge conflict for the second PR because
the same line in `values.yaml` was modified. Thanks to that, we ensure that the `master` branch contains changes from both PRs.

### Guard integration jobs
To postpone the execution of integration jobs, we should add an additional step at the beginning of every integration job.
To decide, if integration job can be executed, use statuses of given pull request:
![](./assets/job-status-checks.png)

Most of these statuses are sent by Prow and represents statuses of executing jobs.

The algorithm of Guard is following:
1. Fetch all required statuses sent by Prow for given PR that represents components build. 
2. If some status is marked as a failed, fail fast integration job. 
3. If all statuses are successful, continue integration job execution.
4. If waiting for statuses takes more than defined timeout (10min), fail integration job.

> 5. If some statuses are in Pending state, sleep for some time (15s) and go to point 1.

Author: so what is a correct word? Idle?

> Ad Step 1. Guard filters statuses by its names. In Kyma Prow configuration, there is a convention for

Author: done

job names. For example, every component job name for master branch starts with `pre-master-kyma-components-`.
Ad Step 2, Guard fails fast integration job to reduce the number of provisioned clusters and VMs.
Ad Step 4, Guard defines a timeout for checking jobs statuses. Prow defines a maximum number of concurrently executed jobs. 
There could be an extremely rare situation, that Prow executes only integration jobs that all wait for components jobs that cannot be executed because a maximum
number of concurrent jobs was reached. In such a case, a developer has to trigger an integration job manually. 

Working code for Guard can be found in [PR#904](https://github.com/kyma-project/test-infra/pull/904)

### Job enforcing changes in one PR

> To require updating charts immediately, a new Presubmit job should be defined. Below you can find it's pseudocode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To require updating charts immediately, a new presubmit job should be defined. For example:
```

```

> - get component's changed in current PR (ignore markdown files)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Get components changed in the current PR (ignore Markdown files)
```

> - check if chart uses the current version. Use Makefile target "path-to-referenced-charts"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if the chart uses the current version. Use the "path-to-referenced-charts" Makefile target.
```

```

> Still, there should be an option to merge a PR without updating a chart. In such a case, a PR should have the label, for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Still, there should be an option to merge a PR without updating a chart. In such a case, a PR should have a special label, for
```

> example: `postpone-integration` and Presubmit job described above should succeed immediately.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
example the `postpone-integration`, in which case the presubmit job would succeed immediately.   
```
